thank you very much I would like to
begin by announcing some important
developments in our war against the
Chinese virus we'll be invoking the
defense production act just in case we
need it in other words I think you all
know what it is and it can do a lot of
good things if we need it and we will we
will have it all completed signing it in
just a little while right after I'm
finished with this conference I'll be
signing it it's prepared to go so we
will be invoking the defense production
Act last week I signed an emergency
declaration under the Stafford Act which
is you know we invoked previously and
which activated FEMA's National Response
Coordination Center FEMA now is fully
engaged at the highest levels today FEMA
is activated in every region we are at
level one level one being the highest
level which we will work with and we've
been working with FEMA I've done a lot
of work with FEMA they're incredible
it's always been on hurricanes or
tornados they're right now in Tennessee
a large group working in Tennessee have
been incredible that was tragic event
Alabama last year also a tornado and
then obviously the the numerous
hurricanes and different locations that
were in some cases very devastating and
in every case FEMA came through this is
a very different kind of a work for FEMA
but they will come through as they
always do we have tremendous people
tremendous talent in FEMA we're sending
upon request the two hospital ships
they're being prepared right now they're
massive ships they're the big white
ships with the Red Cross on the sides
one is called the mercy and the other is
called the comfort and they are in
tip-top shape they soon will be they're
getting ready to come up to New York I
spoke with Governor Cuomo about it he's
excited about
and I also we haven't made the final
determination as to where it's going to
go on the west coast the comfort is
located now in San Diego and it's going
to be will be picking the destination
fairly shortly so those two ships are
being prepared to go and they can be
launched over the next week or so
depending on need earlier this week the
first clinical trial of the vaccine
candidate for the virus began in
Washington State as you probably know
the genetic sequence of the virus was
first published in January but thanks to
the unprecedented partnership between
the FDA NIH and the private sector we've
reached human trials for the vaccine
just eight weeks later that's a record
by many many months it used to take
years to do this and now we did it just
in a very short while that's the fastest
development in history of what we're
doing with regard to the vaccine making
very very big progress today I can
announce further steps to expand testing
capacity we're working with several
groups to determine if the self swab a
much easier process than the current
process that's not very nice to do I can
tell you because I did it but we have a
current process that's a little bit
difficult if you haven't done the the
groups are working on determining if a
self swab by an individual is as
effective as the other the others very
effective very accurate but we're going
to see if we can do a self swab which is
would be a lot more popular I can tell
you that so and that would be
administered also by a health official
but it would be a lot easier to do the
the fact is that the health
professionals would it would free it
would free up a lot let me just say the
self swab is what it is it's a self swab
you do it yourself
the other has to be issued by a health
professional and it's something that is
quite difficult and we think it's
working out for the self swab and if it
would test positive the people would go
and they would do what they have to do
but we think that's probably working out
I've asked the FDA to cut through the
red tape and reduce regulatory barriers
we are looking at some very exciting
things and I'm going to be holding the
second news conference either today
we're going to talk about the FDA some
things are happening that are quite
exciting and we're gonna be doing that
either later today or tomorrow fairly
early tomorrow so we'll see what happens
but the FDA my instructions is I've been
working very very hard on a number of
developments and we'll be discussing
them with you later today or tomorrow
and this afternoon I'll be meeting with
nurses on the front lines of the battle
against the virus they're truly American
heroes they want to get it done they're
incredible people so we're gonna be
meeting with nurses and I actually look
forward to that very brave they're
taking a lot of risk and they they have
done an incredible job and they never
complained today I'm also announcing
that the Department of Housing and Urban
development's is providing immediate
relief to renters and homeowners by
suspending all foreclosures and
evictions until the end of April so
we're working very closely with dr. ben
Carson and everybody from HUD every
generation of Americans has been called
to make shared sacrifices for the good
of the nation in World War two young
people in their teenage years
volunteered to fight they wanted to
fight so badly because they love our
country workers refused to go home and
slept in factory floors to keep assembly
lines running and you know the numbers
of ships that they built through in
World War two to this day has never
nothing like that has ever been equal
they were doing ships on a literally on
a daily basis nobody's ever seen
anything like it
and to this day nobody's seen anything
like that what they were able to do
during
world war two and now it's our time we
must sacrifice together because we are
all in this together and we'll come
through together it's the invisible
enemy that's always the toughest enemy
the invisible enemy but we're going to
defeat the invisible enemy I think we're
going to do it even faster than we
thought and it will be a complete
victory it'll be a total victory
so we'll have a second conference again
having to do with the FTA and this I
think it's going to be potentially a
very exciting news conference and we
will do it as quickly as we can so
whether it's today or tomorrow and all
with that ask Mike Pence to say a few
words and thank you very much Thank You
mr. president
the White House coronavirus task force
met this morning and now that we have
cases in all 50 states we're continuing
to move out on the president's call to
bring the full resources of the federal
government a full partnership with every
state and territory the full power of
the American economy to support
businesses and families as the president
says to us and every day we'll do
whatever it takes we're all in this
together
yesterday the president met with the
tourism industry executives and also had
an engaging discussion with all the top
companies in our industrial and medical
supply chain the president as you all
are were also announced today that by
mutual consent the northern border to
Canada will be closed to non-essential
travel this does not include essential
travel or the transit of goods but it
was through a mutual discussion that
took place this morning between the
president and Prime Minister Trudeau and
the Department of Homeland Security will
be effectuating at that decision
president spoke with some of the
nation's top business leaders today
again to speak about the supply chain in
the country and for our part we're going
to be conducting a conference call later
today with state and local health
officials to renew our ongoing
commitment of cooperation and
collaboration as the president said last
consigning the Stafford Act he stood up
the National Response Coordination
Center and today at the president's
direction
FEMA has gone to level one FEMA's
mission is to support disasters that are
locally executed state managed and
federally supported and tomorrow the
president will be hosting all the
nation's governor's from a video
conference at FEMA to ensure that they
have full connection to all of the
activated regions for FEMA going forward
and with regard to testing I'm pleased
to report that we're increasing the
number of tests being performed by the
thousands every day thanks to the
public-private partnership that
President Trump forged with commercial
laboratories around the country our
health experts tell us to remind every
American it's important to remember
people without symptoms should not get
tested we want to make sure that the
supply of testing is there for those
that need it most or are symptomatic or
in the vulnerable population dr. deborah
birx in a moment we'll address the
progress that we're making on testing
the infection rate our recommendations
to every America as well as some
important new findings about the impact
on youth that we're gaining from data
that's coming in from Europe that'll be
important to every every American on the
subject of supplies and the president
has our task force extremely focused as
the president mentioned yesterday
mentioned that he's invoking the defense
production act today secretary Esper in
a few moments will describe the ongoing
efforts that the Department of Defense
is taking to make medical resources
available and secretary Robert Wilkie
will announce decisions the VA has made
to expand hospital capacity within their
system also with regard to medical
personnel at the president's Direction
HHS is issuing a regulation today that
will allow all doctors and medical
professionals to practice across state
lines to meet the needs of hospitals
that may arise in adjoining areas in
addition to that we are again today
asking every American and our medical
community leaders and hospitals to
partner with us in delaying elective
procedures across the country in our
healthcare system to ensure that medical
supplies and medical capacity go where
they're needed most Seema Verma will
describe guidance that CMS will be
issuing on that front and finally just I
want to remind every American of the the
president's 15-day guidance to slow the
spread we are grateful for members of
the media and the general public that
are adhering to these sharing them with
neighbors and friends all of our experts
continue to believe that if every
American will do their part and embrace
and put into practice these principles
that we can significantly limit the
reach of the corona virus in the weeks
and months ahead
thank you thank you very much thank you
Thank You mr. president mr. vice
president so you know we continue to
look at data every single day there are
concerning reports coming out of France
and Italy about some young people
getting seriously ill and very seriously
ill in the icy use we think part of this
may be that people heated the early data
coming out of China and coming out of
South Korea without the elderly or those
with pre-existing medical conditions
were at particular risk it may have been
that the millennial generation our
largest generation our future generation
that will carry us through for the next
multiple decades there may be
disproportional a number of infections
among that group and so even if it's a
rare occurrence it may be seen more
frequently in that group and be evident
now so we're looking at that information
very carefully we have not seen any
significant mortality in the children
but we are concerned about the early
reports coming out of Italy and France
so again I'm going to call on that
generation that's part of that group
that brought us innovation particularly
throughout all of their ability to look
around
and skipped through games and I always
went level by level I didn't realize
that you could go from level three to
level seven that's what they've taught
us they look for things that we don't
see we need them to be healthy so again
not all in calling on you to adhere
what's in the agai dense but to really
ensure that each and every one of you
are protecting each other and so we
cannot have these large gatherings that
continue to occur throughout the country
for people who are off work to then be
socializing in large groups and
spreading the virus you have the
potential then to spread it to someone
who does have a condition that none of
us knew about and caused them to have a
disastrous outcome finally on the
testing piece and what we're learning I
know you know last week and bringing the
private sector I think what has been
exciting to me over the last two and a
half weeks is to see this administration
harness the full capacity of the private
sector understanding that a lot of our
solutions that we need to confront this
virus a lot rely on the private sector
bringing the private sector commercial
labs was critical into this process we
are now beginning to see that they have
spread out in a prioritized way because
we ask them to to prioritize the
region's that were mostly affected and
so you still may have difficulty getting
tests in areas that do not have
significant cases we've had them
prioritize the regions where we need
diagnosis and their diagnostic percent
remember I told you South Korea was
under 4% so 96% of people were negative
the last report we've seen from the
laboratories have about a 7 plus percent
positivity rate still 93 plus percent or
92 percent are negative but I think
that's encouraging to me personally that
we're prioritizing appropriately to
those areas that have the greatest need
today and yesterday thermo Fisher pushed
out most of their laboratory testing
capacity and that will dramatically
increase the op platform and the ability
to run additional tests in addition to
Roche so I appreciate everybody's
attention to these numbers I'm
I'm excited that we've prioritized where
the need was the greatest but again
please follow the guidance and please
make sure in every report that you're
putting out that you're talking about
the presidential guidance to actually
stop the spread of this virus thank you
so good afternoon everyone and I want to
provide an update on DoD's coronavirus
up efforts as we continue to focus on
our three priorities that's first of all
protecting our personnel and their
families second safeguarding our
national security mission capabilities
and third of course supporting the
administration's whole-of-government
approach first of all though I do want
to assure the American people that the
United States military remains ready and
capable of defending the country and our
interests abroad now with that the
department is leaning forward in our
response to kovat 19 we have issued
international and domestic travel
restrictions to all DoD personnel and
families that should dramatically reduce
potential exposure to the virus those
have been in place for some time now as
I announced yesterday the department
defense will make available up to five
million n95 respirator masks and other
personal protective equipment from our
own strategic reserves to the Department
of Health and Human Services for
distribution the first 1 million masks
will be available immediately we're also
prepared to distribute to HHS up to
2,000 operational deployable ventilators
for use as needed now yesterday I was at
Fort Detrick Maryland which is probably
the military's premiere research
institute where I got updated on the
incredible work our people are doing as
part of the interagency team to work on
vaccines and therapeutics they are
making great progress there we also have
announced that we've certified our 16th
lab or will soon certified our 16th lab
to help with processing tests from
across the country additionally I have
directed as the president mentioned that
the hospital ships mercy and comfort be
prepared to deploy to increase the
nation's medical capacity and we have
also alerted a variety of filled and
expeditionary hospitals to be prepared
to deploy as well as needed based on
direction from the commander in chief
today a leadership from the Army Corps
of Engineers is in New York meeting with
Governor Cuomo and his team I spoke with
Governor Cuomo yesterday and other
governors I will be speaking to more in
the coming days to make sure that they
know what DoD can provide through our
system to and to address their needs in
my conversations with governor's and
members of Congress about DoD's
resources I've made it clear that we
will continue to support the
administration's comprehensive efforts
and the country every step of the way
while ensuring our nation's security
remains the top priority I want to
conclude by thanking again all of our
service members and their families who
have been affected by this outbreak they
are all great heroes we are continue to
support them throughout this we are all
in this together thank you all very much
so yesterday the president made a very
important announcement about telehealth
and this is allowing our 62 million
seniors to be able to get some medical
services from the safety of their home
reducing their risk and without any
co-pays but we're also making sure that
the health care system is prepared and
that those on the front lines have the
support that they need the reality is
the stakes are high and we need to
preserve personal protective equipment
for those that are on the frontlines of
this fight and to that end we have put
out guidelines over the last two weeks
to expand the types of masks that can be
used in routine care and saving those
and 95s for the most risky situations
conserving personal protective equipment
is also essential to combat the virus
so today CMS will announce detailed
recommendations to further promote this
needed conservation specifically by
limiting non-essential elective medical
and surgical procedures including dental
procedures we believe that these
recommendations will help surgeons
patients and hospitals prioritize what
is essential while leaving the ultimate
decision in the hands of state and local
health officials and those clinicians
who have direct responsibility to their
patients and we urge providers and
clinicians and patients to seriously
consider these recommendations they will
not only preserve equipment but it also
allows doctors and nurses to help those
that are on the front lines and it will
protect patients from
necessary exposure to the virus we fully
appreciate that this is going to have a
major impact on the healthcare system
but the shared sacrifice is essential to
help those that are on the front lines
and I want to thank the medical
societies such as the American College
of Surgeons and the American Dental
Association that took a proactive
approach and already posted these
recommendations and we've also talked to
the American Medical Association and
they have fully indicated their support
for this recommendation we now invite
the entire healthcare community to join
us in this effort thank you Thank You
mr. president my instructions from the
president were very clear I was to do
everything imaginable as aggressively as
possible to protect the nine and a half
million veterans who are part of the
Department of Veterans Affairs last
month
we established 19 emergency operations
centers across the country we began to
limit the number of visitors who entered
our facilities we began I think the
first we were the first system to begin
triaging across the country and our 170
hospitals the entrance of anyone into
our facility without being questioned or
tested we expanded those restrictions to
those you know 135 community living
centers which which have about 7800
veterans who are in acute and acute
conditions to make sure that they were
protected we also took the next step and
made sure that we limited the dental
surgeries that we were provided we've
cut back by one-third the number of
routine appointments we have had and we
have canceled elective surgeries these
were all part the president's directive
to be as aggressive in a public health
sense as we could be and I think we have
set the pace for the entire country I
will say we've often said that we work
the most noble mission in the federal
government our veterans have been in the
toughest spots in the world they have
been put in conditional conditions that
are unimaginable
most Americans and they have responded
they've responded clearly they have
responded with passion and also the
400,000 members of our department who
are out there on the front lines the
last thing I will say is that you have
heard a lot about the fourth mission
that VA has our first three missions are
health care benefits and memorial
Affairs our fourth mission is to support
the federal government in times of
natural disasters and pandemics we are
the the buttress force in case that FEMA
or HHS calls upon us to deploy medical
professionals across the country to meet
crises but we plan for that every day we
are gaming out emergency preparedness
scenarios and we stand ready when the
president needs us to expand our mission
about the potential for what could come
and he said that unemployment could
skyrocket to 20 percent are we looking
that that could rival the Great
Depression are we looking at potentially
[Music]
yeah no I don't agree that's a absolute
total worst-case scenario but no we
don't look at that at all we're nowhere
near it okay why do you keep calling
this the Chinese virus there are reports
of dozens of incidents of bias against
Chinese Americans in this country your
own a secretary a czar and says he does
not use this term because ethnicity does
not cause the virus why do you keep
using this comes from journalists
it's not racist at all no I met it okay
it comes from China
that's why comes from China I want to be
accurate yeah please John I have the
great I have great love for all of the
people from our country but as you know
China tried to say at one point maybe
this stuff now that it was caused by
American soldiers that can't happen it's
not gonna happen
not as long as I'm president it comes
from China John Kriss two questions my
good mr. president first of all in
defense procurement Act you're invoking
it today senator surely I said on the
floor a short time ago that it urgently
needs to be put into action to produce
medical supplies particularly
ventilators do you have some targets
that you would like to see immediately
spool up we do have we have tremendous
numbers of ventilators but there's never
been an instance like this where no
matter what you have it's not enough
that would be the case and we will be
it's it's being signed it's essentially
drawn and I'm going to sign it in just a
little while if we need to use it we'll
be using it at full speed ahead it's
urgent Lee needed to be do you have some
time we're going to know whether or not
urgent but we will yeah we do have
targets we have targets for certain
pieces of equipment we have targets for
masks you know the masks and numbers of
basks are incredible we've ordered
millions of them but we need millions
for this a thing like this has never
been requested and it's never we've
never had even think in terms of these
numbers but we need millions of masks
and all of that will be order we need
respirators we need ventilators is a big
thing because it's a complex piece of
equipment so we have a lot of metal
edges but we're going to be ordering
more what size will the checks be that
will be sent out to be determined we're
working with the Senate right now we're
working with everybody on Capitol Hill
there's been tremendous there really has
been I mean with with some exceptions
obviously because it's always the way it
is but there has been they've been
getting along very well Republicans and
Democrats it's a nice thing very
bipartisan so forth well we're gonna see
I don't want to get into that right now
John we we are looking at different
numbers we're looking at timing that
would be different splitting the time
splitting the payments we're looking at
a lot of different things hasn't been
determined yet but it will shortly be
determined and people want to go big as
opposed everybody seems to want to go
big and they want to get to the recovery
the big day is the big thing we can do
is get rid of this horrible I call it
the unseen the unseen enemy you call it
you is it that was in different terms
for it but what it's
upon us and it's it did 128 countries I
think it's in something like that very
close to that think of that so it
spreads violently it's a very contagious
very very contagious virus American to
be on a wartime footing in terms of
fighting this virus I do I actually do
I'm looking at it that way because you
know if it got out of control the big
thing we did was a very early stoppage
of people coming in who could be very
very heavily infected that was a it was
a very good move and it was very early
very very early when most people
including a lot of professionals they
didn't want us to do it that really
saved a lot of lives and yeah I look at
it I view it as a in a sense of wartime
president I mean that's what we're
fighting I mean it's it's a it's a very
tough situation you you have to do
things you have to you have to close
parts of an economy that six weeks ago
were the best they've ever been with the
best economy we've ever had and then one
day you have to close it down in order
to defeat this enemy and but we're doing
it and we're doing it well and I'll tell
you the American people have been
incredible for the most part they've
been really incredible yeah please you
just said there are a tremendous number
of ventilators that we have but for
weeks
hospitals have been warning about a
critical shortage if they say we are not
prepared for so why did it take so long
you know hospitals are supposed to have
ventilators too and when we have
thousands of ventilators it sounds like
a lot but this is a very unforeseen
thing nobody ever thought of these
numbers nobody ever saw numbers like
this even with regard to testing
normally we wouldn't be doing testing
and they decided to do it very very hard
to ramp up now we're getting highly
sophisticated tests and it's going very
well but nobody's ever heard of testing
and the kind of quantities that you're
talking about well we knew it depends it
depends on how it goes
worst case absolutely the best case not
not at all so we're gonna have to see
where it goes but we are ordering
thousands and thousands event
and they're complex you know these are
complex machines and but we're ordering
them does anybody have a microwave you
do how many do we have we have a
specific number of ventilators in the
stockpile it's in excess of of 10,000
and you just heard the announcement from
the Department of Defense they'll be
adding several more thousand to that but
president even this morning and
yesterday afternoon speaking with the
largest companies in the supply chain in
this country we're hearing a tremendous
spirit among industry leaders who are
ready to step in and add to that volume
but the stockpiles don't count all of
the ventilators that exist today in the
marketplace and in health care
facilities around the country but the
president's given us a director to make
sure that our stockpile but just as
importantly working with industry
leaders that we're securing the increase
in ventilators the increase in mass
gloves
IRA protective care garments that are
all necessary to lean forward and we're
confident we'll be able to accomplish
that with the incredible cooperation of
the supply chain that exists in America
today we can give you the exact number
we'll give it to you but we're ordering
we're ordering a lot more yeah one
second one second Kate and we'll do it
in a second what was the tipping point
Friday we talked about it that Monday
you said no one who were not considering
no I said not yet I spoke with the Prime
Minister Trudeau very good relationship
obviously between us and our two
countries and no tipping point it's just
that we want to we want to isolate from
the standpoint we don't want people
coming into contact because that's the
way we're going to win this war that is
so important and we both thought it was
sad now it's not affecting trade
it's non-essential it's non-essential
crossings
it won't affect trade at all and it was
just something we thought would be good
for both countries yes please
throughout the virus how can you be sure
the trade and everything that's being
shipped from one side well they're doing
it in a very careful manner you can only
be vigilant and very professional but
we're not it's not pertaining at this
moment to trade between the two
countries yeah please yeah about the
trillion-dollar economic stimulus
package could look something like 50
billion for the airlines 150 billion
dollars in loan guarantees in critical
sectors of the economy a 250 billion
dollar payment on April 6th directly to
individuals another 250 billion dollar
payments on May 18 again directly to
individuals and as well three hundred
billion dollars for small business loan
guarantees is that in the general sense
what could be could be and we're also
playing with a lot of numbers a lot of
very big numbers and a lot of very small
numbers frankly we want to take care of
we have to help everybody it was
nobody's fault
this happened I mean some people could
say it was somebody's fault actually but
it was nobody's fault and certainly none
of these companies that all of a sudden
had no passengers and planes and had no
passengers on cruise ships and all of
the things that have happened but I will
say that they can't be blamed for this
and we want to keep those companies
vibrant because it's going to be a
comeback very very quickly as soon as
this is solved and it will be solved we
will win and there will be a comeback
and it'll take place very quickly
there's give or take 330 million
Americans or so you just do the math on
that that's about 750 dollars a person a
family of four that would be about three
thousand dollars on average again rough
rough math
which if that were this is hell no I
don't want to say that because it's a
moving these are all every number that
you mentioned
yes we've talked about those numbers
we're also moving those numbers in both
directions so we'll let you know it'll
be it's moving along fast again there's
a great bipartisan effort going on that
that I haven't really seen before to
this extent look it's down the line and
they're looking at it very seriously and
I think would be a great thing because
the others to use a nice word it's very
inconvenient it's very tough Fraser you
tweeted this morning about your approval
rating amongst Republicans you have said
that you give yourself a ten in terms of
handling this crisis how do you reassure
Americans at home who don't trust you to
handle a crisis of this magnitude well I
think we're doing a really good job we
started off with a termination of the
border the people coming in from China
where this all started
that meant I took it very seriously and
when I use the word calm calm doesn't
mean that I'm not taking it seriously
calm means and we should be calm we
should be extremely calm but yeah ninety
five percent within the Republican Party
and over fifty percent and I also have
we have very great approval numbers I
mean people like the job that we're
doing and when you can't compare this to
other epidemics or if you want to use a
different term you can but within this
country and you look at what's happened
over the years this is being handled
very very professionally we're the
greatest professionals in the world
we're doing a good job
nobody has ever been swamped like this
and nothing's been so contagious the
level of contagion has been incredible
actually nobody's seen anything quite
like this yeah Peter go ahead shipped
millions of tests as you and your
colleagues have said why is the federal
government's s of only 15 59 thousand
tests been processed to this point we
just heard from the
Lanta public health director saying that
they have fewer than 50 test kits for
more than 900,000 citizens where louis
I'll let Mike so that's a very critical
question and thank you for asking it so
the test kits that we put out last week
through the approval the rapid movement
of that meeting that President Trump
called less than two weeks ago that has
resulted in bringing our private sector
to the table because the tests in the
platform that was out there could only
run between four and twelve tests per
platform per day we've now moved into
platforms that can run basically tens of
thousands of tests per day so yeah the
reason I'm grateful for your question
because it allows me to point out that a
course then there was backlog there were
individuals who had been tested who
hadn't have their specimen run because
of the slow throughput it's now in a
high-speed platform so we will see the
number of people diagnosed dramatically
increase over the next four to five days
I know some of you will use that to
raise an alarm that we are worse than
Italy because of our slope of our curve
to every American out there it will be
five to six days worth of tests being
run in 24 to 48 hours
so our curves will not be stable until
sometime next week the reason I talked
about thermo Fisher yesterday is because
their platform is in two thousand
laboratories they're the ones that are
putting out the million tests this week
that will solve the issue that atlanta
and others have brought up I wanted to
be clear we prioritize the areas we do
county-by-county analyses based on those
analyses on what counties had more than
50 cases we prioritize the test kits we
put out the 400,000 and that's why we're
seeing a seven percent plus positivity
rate we'll be able to expand that
platform and reprioritize based on the
assess of the
the other kids perhaps I can follow up
Howard non-systematic professional
athletes getting tests while others are
waiting in line and can't get them do
the well-connected go to the front of
the line well that kid have to ask them
that question I mean they I've read no I
wouldn't say so but perhaps that's been
the story of life that does happen on
occasion and I've noticed where some
people have been tested fairly quickly
look we inherited a very excuse me
excuse me we inherited a very obsolete
system this was a system that was
out-of-date obsolete or it was a system
that was never meant to take care of the
kind of quantity the number of people
that we're talking about millions and
millions of people if you go back in
years past like even recently with the
flu nobody had tests before they didn't
test the entire nation to see whether or
not they had flu they got the flu they
got better hopefully they got better
that was it now all of a sudden they do
this very complex testing what we've
done is we broken it down we've broken
up the system but it was obsolete and or
you could say it was also a system that
just wasn't meant to handle the kind of
volley the volume that you're talking
about we've rebuilt it into a system
that for the future will be a very good
system if you want to go this route but
this was never done before and I would
imagine it will be done in the future
but we built it into a very good system
by using private companies the great
private companies and I have to say
Roches been doing a very good job they
of doing a lot of work a very good job
but this was an obsolete system this was
not a system that was meant to do
anything like this or even near this
john is calling on you to suspend teres
with other countries as part of the
response to the corona virus who heads
that group those countries do check it's
an american free trade I know I'm sure a
free trade look china is paying those
billions and billions of dollars in
tariffs and there's no reason to do that
they haven't even spoken to me about
that China hasn't asked me to do that
but we're getting billions of dollars
here from tariffs from China and I can't
imagine Americans asking for that but
it could be that China will ask for a
suspension or something see what happens
China's having a very rough time they
have their worst year in 76 years as I
understand it that would a very very
tough time and then on top of it this
happened with the virus but no we're
taking in billions of dollars a year in
tariffs and this was caused by something
totally unrelated to tariffs asylum
seekers and people who crossed the
southern border illegally
are you planning to invoke 42 USC 265
which would allow you to prohibit entry
of certain people inches yes probably
today well I think essential is medical
we have military working together we
have industry working together and again
it's not affecting trade so things like
that but just leisurely let's go to a
restaurant that have dinner which a lot
of people do they come both ways they go
in both directions that kind of thing we
we have ended on a temporary basis yeah
please go ahead
not close that no we're not gotta close
it but we are invoking a certain
provision that will allow us great
latitude as to what we do please go
ahead you know what go because just a
week ago
um you all were standing here telling us
that unless you had sustained contact
with somebody who is symptomatic for
koban 19 you really didn't need to work
eautiful the president the vice
president that if they shook hands with
somebody who had this if they took a
photograph with with somebody who had
this he didn't really need to worry and
yet several days later were in a
situation where people are being told
don't leave your houses there are
curfews saying you cannot walk alone at
night after a certain time can you walk
us through what seemed like a very
dramatic swaying a very dramatic
disconnect from what we were hearing
before
right now so two things we look at data
all the time and I know you're looking
at the China and South Korea data and
when you look at China and South Korea
data and you look what China and South
Korea did you can see that their curves
are not only blunted outside of Wuhan so
the Chinese areas outside of Wuhan
blunted curve and South Korea blunted
curve if you look at their curve today
they're already on the far end of their
epidemic curve of course none of those
countries are fully back to work and so
that's what we worry about too secondly
there was a series of scientific
articles published and I know you've
seen them too about surface
contamination I think none of us really
understood the level of surface piece so
we're still working out how much is it
by human human transmission and how much
is it by surface this is why those
fundamental guidelines were put out that
says don't expose yourself to surfaces
outside the home basically what those
guidelines are is don't expose yourself
to excess number of persons who could be
asymptomatic and infected and then the
person-to-person contact and don't
expose yourself to surfaces that could
have had the virus on it for which on
hard surfaces I know we had the
cardboard issue about shipping hard
surfaces not shown in fabric as much or
in cardboard but hard surface
transmission these are issues that we
haven't had to deal with before with a
level of respiratory infections and
that's why we have this concern and
that's why president put out the
guidelines and so it's to cover both of
those pieces that's all new science all
new models I think many of you have the
Imperial study available and looked at
the impact of those that's the first
time those have been modeled as a
comprehensive approach to mitigating an
epidemic
The Wall Street Journal is reporting
that the administration would look at an
executive order that would expand the
use of investigational drug scientists a
warning that this could put patients at
risk I haven't seen you know I haven't
seen the article we will we are making a
lot of progress therapeutically I will
say that and but I have not seen that
article now we've shut down
non-essential travel to Canada
are you considering shutting down I'll
travel to brunt the spread of the virus
and we've heard from industries like the
airline's who are seeking relief
what other industries or what how
exactly is your administration I'm going
to determine which industries and
businesses well there are certain
industries that people know it may be
airlines would be number one if you look
at what's going on they go from having
the best year they've ever had to having
no passengers because of what we've had
to do in order to win this war it's a
war and so you know basically you know
what many of the industries are what we
want to do is we want to make sure they
all stay together so that after the war
is won we can immediately go right back
up to where we were and even beyond I
think we're going to go beyond where we
were a lot of people are saying that by
the way we're poised to do that but we
have to win the war first yeah please go
ahead today for those industries but
their proposal doesn't detail which
industries we get that money and how
much so aside from the airlines which
you just mentioned what about the cruise
industry the hotel how much of that
money do you see them using we're
talking about all of it haven't detailed
it yet we have detailed it two senators
and two members of the House we have
been talking about it and we're coming
up with numbers haven't gotten there yet
but certainly hotel industry the cruise
ship industry the airlines those are all
prime candidates episode
reporter sir when you think which border
the northern border when you say
temporary which is what you said in your
tweet did that mean 30 days I would say
30 days and hopefully at the end of 30
days we'll be in great shape
perhaps not taking some of these
warnings as seriously as you'd like some
of those people also seem to be your
supporters and conservatives who may be
quoting some of what you said at the
beginning of this comparing it to the
flu what is your message to them to
really follow what you've been saying so
far and are you concerned that they're
still listening maybe to some of your
earlier comments rather than your more
recent ones well I think my earlier
comments to become I mean I I do want
people to become because we're going to
win this and we're gonna win it it's
just a question of time and I wanted to
go quickly
so based on the fact that I wanted to go
quickly I hope they just listen to what
we've been saying over the last period
of time we don't want them gathering and
I see they do gather including on
beaches and including in restaurants
young people they don't realize they're
feeling invincible I don't know if you
felt invincible when you were very young
but they were feeling totally invincible
or are feeling that way but they don't
realize that they can be carrying lots
of bad things home to grandmother and
grandfather and even their parents so we
want them to heed the advice we made the
advice and I think it's getting through
I do believe it's getting through Jim I
think they're watching a lot of these
people the advice heed the advice I just
said yeah thank you thank you Peter
humanik speaking say it he was rather
and talking about China you've been very
clear about who you think it's a blame
or where the origins of the wings or the
viruses nothing no no I don't think I
know who where it came from I don't know
if you'd say Chinese to blame certainly
we didn't get an early run on it it
would have been helpful if we knew about
it earlier but it comes from China and
it's not a question about that nobody's
questioning that saying that they should
be punished in so many words for
inflicting this on the American people
do you feel that way about well I have a
lot of respect for Tom cotton and I know
exactly what he's been saying and there
were those people that say that so we'll
see what happens thank you you had your
hand up so nicely for a long time it's
your time thank you sir we've seen the
Chinese government kick out reporters
from The Wall Street Journal the New
York Times The Washington Post what is
your message to the Chinese when it
comes to transparency at a moment we
still have reporters asking you
questions here at the White House yeah
I'm not happy to see it I don't you know
I have my own disputes with all three of
those media groups I think you know that
very well
but I don't like seeing that at all I'm
not happy about that at all yes do you
believe that China is inflicting this
upon our country no I don't believe
they're inflicting I think they could
have given us a lot earlier notice
absolutely I'm asking because I see that
they're very high you know if you look
I'm 95 percent of the Republican Party
we just had a poll that was done by a
very reputable group where I'm beating
sleepy Joe Biden by a lot in Florida in
the state of Florida and in other states
you know so I don't really know who
you're talking about
hi Jennifer go ahead please
explain to them what's coming what was
their wages and they explain to me where
they're coming from I mean they went
from as I said full planes packed the
best year they've ever had by far to
bomb
one day empty because of what we have to
do to get rid of to win this war or we
would have a level of death like people
haven't seen before so they've been
fantastic I mean they've been great but
you know they went from being extremely
happy to being people that are running
companies that are gonna need some help
and will help them Jennifer would you
give us an update on how that's going
we've been getting some reports that
counties have been having difficulty
getting what's going I mean there's a
lot of influx to those lungs as you
could imagine a lot of people are
looking at it but we're going to be
increasing funding a lot and they're
very well prepared to do what they have
to do and the SBA is doing a fantastic
job she is doing a really good job the
administrator dr. Berger Frank
researchers have had some luck with
hydroxychloroquine in shortening the
duration of disease is that something
that might be in the arsenal of
therapeutics here in the United States
I think we're exploring every one of
those issues on the president asks for a
critical briefing on that today he
opened with that it is more than that
single drug there are other drugs that
individuals are looking at just to go
back to what we have talked about many
times there is things that look really
good in cell culture against the virus
that may look good in small animals and
then don't have an impact in humans and
so those are the pieces that we're
looking at very carefully of course
there's always antidotal reports and
we're trying to figure out how many Ana
Dodos reports equal real scientific
breakthroughs are you confident
of the seasonality of Calvados all we
can do is look at the past to inform the
future we know what's ours looked like
we also know and I just want to put this
out I know you can get it online look at
the curve in China and look at the curve
in South Korea those curves were
accomplished and still the winter season
and so we're trying to understand what
those relationships are we're very
interested in the curves in Italy
because of their different approach and
we're following every single country's
curves and so all we can do is look at
prior coronavirus and prior respiratory
infection RNA viruses these are RNA
viruses when you look at flu in the
northern hemisphere when you look at
para influenza and some of the other
cold viruses and if you look at SARS
that's the way the peak normally occurs
but that is a November to April we all
started later and so you're asking me to
predict based on a later start and
that's what we're trying to really look
at China and South Korea to really
inform them those that have needed to be
tested we believe we've caught most of
them right now we have 44 veterans who
have tested positive sadly one has
passed in Portland we are working with
state labs and private companies to make
sure that testing is available because
the president had us out aggressively
early we have we have been in a better
place than most health care systems in
the country I cannot predict this dr.
Burke set when the next surge will be if
it will be but one of the things that we
do at VA is that we prepare for national
emergencies be the national disasters or
epidemics we started preparing for this
we started stockpiling equipment
our equipment is stable and I think
that's in large part because the
instructions the president we've tested
several hundred I can't give you the
trick yeah we've tested several hundred
yes we've tested several I don't know
exactly I do know that forty four
veterans have the virus
most of those are quarantined at home
for doctor births quickly I'm trying to
understand what we it's about the
mortality rate
yesterday we underlined the fact that we
had reached a hundred deaths and this
morning we wake up and were 110 at
within 12 hours we climb by 10 percent
is it something we have to expect from
now on a 10 percent increase every 12
hours so very early on in each one of
these cases if you look at all of the
countries to date the mortality is
higher at the beginning because you're
diagnosing the sickest the ones who came
in quite ill and I just want to remind
the American public that's still the
majority the risk for serious illness
and the majority of Americans are low
but that doesn't mean that you can't
transmit it to one of those higher risk
groups and that's why we're asking for
all Americans to take responsibility
you're seeing mortality or deaths today
from infections that occurred two to
three weeks ago in general the other
thing that you're seeing is the dramatic
and very difficult impact of this virus
in nursing homes and that's why very
early on the President and Vice
President had us come out and CMS put
those very strict rules in place and
everybody thought we were being too
strict and keeping loved ones away from
their family at nursing homes if we're
going to solve this with a lower death
rate we have to protect the elderly
because of their percent is much higher
in mortality than any other age group
go ahead please reporting that the
federal government has a plan that shows
that this corona virus outbreak might
laugh as much as long as 18 months are
you seeing those numbers could my second
question is there are some at least one
White House official who use the term
Kong flu referring to the fact that this
virus started in China is that
acceptable is it wrong are you worried
that that having this virus being talked
about as as a Chinese virus that that
might wonder who should me you know who
said that but would you can use the
facts a the time again a person at the
White House you use the tears to join
flu my question is does where that's
wrong come flu and do you think using
the term Chinese virus Becket's Asian
Americans no no no I think they probably
would agree with it a hundred percent
it comes from China there's nothing not
to agree okay how about the last
question switching gears to a larger
question here we've seen that before the
pandemic there were a lot of Americans
that were already alienated we saw a
deaths of despair increasing through
suicide and other things now is these
individuals a lot of times in rural
parts of the country are self isolating
what is your message to those
individuals and what do you hope that
individuals communities and churches
will be able to return my messages to
all Americans but to those Americans who
are going through a lot we love them
we're with them and we will not let them
down thank you all very much